
One technique for improving IR performance is to provide searchers with
ways of finding morphological variants of search terms.  If, for example, 
a searcher enters the term stemming as part of a query, it is likely that 
s/he will also be interested in such variants as stemmed and stem.  We use 
the term conflation, meaning the act of fusing or combining, as the general 
term for the process  of matching morphological term variants.  Conflation 
can be either manual--using some kind of regular expressions--or automatic, 
via  programs called stemmers.  Stemming is also used in IR to reduce the 
size of index files.  Since a single stem typically corresponds to several 
full terms, by storing stems instead of terms, compression factors of over 
fifty percent can be achieved.

As can be seen in Figure 1.2 in chapter 1, terms can be stemmed at indexing 
time or at search time. The advantage of stemming at indexing time is 
efficiency and index file compression--since index terms are already
stemmed, this operation requires no resources at search time, and the 
index file will be compressed as described above. The disadvantage of 
indexing time stemming is that information about the full terms will be 
lost, or additional storage will be required to store both the stemmed and 
unstemmed forms.

Figure 8.1 shows a taxonomy for stemming algorithms.  There are four 
automatic approaches. Affix removal algorithms remove suffixes and/or 
prefixes from terms leaving a stem.  These algorithms sometimes also 
transform the resultant stem.  The name stemmer derives from  this method, 
which is the most common.  Successor variety stemmers use the frequencies 
of letter sequences in a body of text as the basis of stemming. The n-gram 
method conflates terms based on the number of digrams or n-grams they share.
Terms and their corresponding stems can also be stored in a table. Stemming
is then done via lookups in the table.  These methods are described below.
